another massacre in Gaza Israeli strikes
two days in a row kill more than a 100
people at the jabalia refugee camp the
UN is calling the region a living hell
Israel has now targeted hospitals
refugee camps and mosques what will it
take to launch a war crimes
investigation this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm de
abuga so for a second consecutive day
Israeli forces launched an air strike on
jabalia that's the largest refugee camp
in Gaza more than a 100 people have been
killed in two days of bombardment as the
total number of Palestinians killed in
Gaza since October the 7th near as
8,800 the UN is calling the Reg of
living hell that do Palestinians deal
with unprecedented death destruction and
deprivation rights groups are demanding
Israel be investigated for war crimes
for targeting civilian areas but it's
not clear if that will be possible given
Israel's backing by the United States
and other Western Powers we'll discuss
this and The Wider conflict with our
guests in a moment first this update
from Victoria gatenby on the situation
in
Gaza
a second Israeli strike on the jabalia
refugee camp less than 24 hours after an
attack killed more than a 100 people on
Tuesday six bombs dropped by Israeli war
planes on Palestinian homes resulted in
this scene of Carnage one witness
described it as feeling like the end of
the
world with no excavators heavy machinery
or rescue equipment survivors tried to
recover people with their bare
hands the injured were taken to the
nearby Indonesian Hospital which was
already overwhelmed with
patients a large number of injured have
come to us after the huge explosion That
Shook the entire jabalia refugee camp
hundreds of injuries hundreds of dead
they were just in their homes they were
targeted while they were in their
homes the UN has called Israel's seege
and destruction of Gaza a humanitarian
catastrophe for its 2.3 million people
there's lack of food water medicine
electricity and fuel Israeli air strikes
have also directly hit gaza's hospitals
including its only cancer facility and
areas around the AL coulds hospital it's
illegal to attack hospitals under
International humanitarian law the
Geneva Convention stipulate that medical
staff and transport must be protected
regardless of the actions of one side so
for example using hospitals for military
purposes um the other side must comply
with International humanitarian rules on
the conduct of hostilities and that as I
said does extend special protection to
Medical units which must be protected
and respected at all times the
international criminal court recently
confirmed that it has jurisdiction to
investigate possible war crimes in the
occupied Palestinian territories even
though Israel is not a signatory to the
Rome statute which governs the court
Human Rights Watch a leading human
rights organization has urged the IC to
issue a formal statement on the
escalating situation between Israel and
Hamas it says a warning by the court
could deter war crimes during the
conflict Victoria gonb for Inside
[Music]
Story we can now bring in our guests
joining us from the Canadian city of
London on in Ontario is Michael link
he's a former special reporter for the
human rights situation in the
Palestinian territories occupied since
19 1967 in rala in the occupied West
Bank we have n a former spokeswoman for
the Palestinian task force on public
diplomacy and in London in the United
Kingdom Donatella rera who's a senior
crisis response adviser with Amnesty
International thanks for your time with
us on Inside Story on Al jazer Michael
link um we saw the images the refugee
camp being targeted for a second time by
the Israelis killing hundreds being
described as a massacre by some people
now the fundamental rule of
International humanitarian law and
conflict is that all parties must
distinguish at all times between
combatants and civilians is that what
we're seeing
here probably most likely not um it's
hard to understand how we are now at a
death hole of around
8,800 Palestinians in uh in Gaza the
vast majority of them being um civilians
uh and not see this as potential war
crimes and amnesty has has called for
war crimes investigations Human Rights
Watch has called for war crimes
investigations keep in mind that uh it
may or may not be deliberate targeting
of civilians but uh even if it's
Reckless or indiscriminate that that
amounts to a war crime um and uh
international law puts very strict um
restrictions on on what uh militaries
can do with respect to this um even if
people haven't left North Gaza uh as
many of thousands have not done um
Israel must uh after the warning that
Israel has given um Israel must continue
to distinguish at all times between
combatants and civilians and if a air
strike or a tank strike is going to
cause
disproportionate uh C uh civilian
casualties that it cannot do that and
there seems to be no um no evidence that
Israel has taken that kind of
Distinction and that kind of legal
thinking into account okay let's bring
in uh Donatella from amnesty uh so do
you think that this is amnesty has been
calling for war crimes investigation um
tell us tell us why and what what
amnesty has seen and do you think that
this strike on the two strikes in fact
on jabalia refugee camp are going to
lead to a war crimes
investigation well I don't know what
they will lead to because obviously as
an investigator I investigate what has
happened and I'm not
uh I'm not able to predict what's going
to happen in the future but this is yet
another strike and there have been many
uh since the 7th of October as indeed
there have been many in the previous
years but since this new escalation
there have been many strikes that should
be investigated as war crimes this is
these are the
latest um clearly a situation where so
many civilians are including thousands
of children
uh have killed and many more have been
have been killed and many more have been
injured in strikes that are being
carried out in very densely populated
areas where the Israeli authorities and
the Israeli Army know full well that
there are many many civilians regardless
of the leaflets that they've dropped on
entire area which is also not something
that can be considered an effective
warning because warnings must be
specific and precise in both
geographically and in terms of time and
this is not the case but the authorities
and the army of Israel knew that there
were many civilians um thousands and
thousands of civilians in in jabalia
refugee camp as there are indeed in Gaza
City and elsewhere um and and to have
carried out a strike which is that
enormous um using um weapons with a wide
impact area
it is known in advance there could be no
doubt in the minds of those who carried
out the attacks and of those who ordered
the attack that there was an extremely
high likelihood a virtual certainty that
large numbers of civilians would be
killed and injured therefore the
requirement of proportionality and of
Distinction uh do not appear to have
been met um in this case as in many
other cases and and the civilians are
you know clearly continuing to to pay
the price okay and I see you nodding
along with what Donatella had to say
what are your thoughts on the jabalia
refugee camp strike and particularly
this issue of
proportionality which we've heard uh
being brought up I mean how how how do
you see uh the proportionality playing
out in the context of what's happening
in Gaza after the October 7th
attacks well yeah thank you for having
me Dar I I would uh remind the viewers
of statements made by senior Israeli
officials uh political and Military uh
at the beginning of this uh assault
which is that uh they you know several
of them said we are more interested in
destruction than accuracy we will turn
Gaza into a city of tents we will
eliminate everything in Gaza these are
statements made by high officials in the
Israeli government and Military and I
think what we're seeing right now in
jabalia in theat and all across the Gaza
Strip is a very accurate translation of
that of those Declarations of intent and
I would also add that uh the Gaza Strip
is very heavily monitored and surveilled
by Israel Israel knows it literally has
the phone number of every person in Gaza
and a recent example of that was your
own reporter yumna Sayad when the
Israeli Army uh uh started increasing
the bombardment in her neighborhood in
Gaza City they called up her husband um
spelled out his entire name uh first and
last name and they knew exactly which
apartment he lived in and they asked him
to leave even though of course the whole
neighborhood was under bombardment and
it was um there was no safe route to
take but what I'm trying to say is that
uh there there are no mistakes here as
far as I'm concerned Israel knows who
lives uh in in these neighborhoods it
knows how many children and women uh
will be uh um um victimized by these
massive massive attacks on very densely
populated poor areas especially when
we're talking about a refugee camp like
jabalia um and it does not care and the
reason why it doesn't care is because it
has
enjoyed uh the political uh protection
of countries like the United States and
others including members of the ICC like
the UK and Germany and others it there's
an entrenched culture of impunity they
know they can get away with it because
they've gotten away with it in the past
this is not the first time Israel has
been accused of war crimes of course the
these are proportions we haven't seen in
decades but really what we're seeing is
Israel taking full advantage of the fact
that it feels that it is above the law
above accountability above even reproach
and that Palestinian lives have been
deemed Expendable right by Major
International Powers regardless of what
they say about humanitarian assistance
which really brings Hollow at this point
Michael link the director of the New
York office of the high commission for
human rights has resigned I'm sure
you're aware and he said that the world
is bearing witness to a textbook case of
genocide from your experience as a
former un special reporter is this a
case of genocide
building this has the qu the possible
makings of uh of a of a genocide
genocide of course is a very high
standard uh to to meet an international
law which includes intent to try to
eliminate in whole or in part uh a uh a
people um and we we know um side has
been pointed to with respect to uh
Rwanda with respect to um myamar and the
ringa um these are not easy uh stances
to be able to make but increasingly uh
we're hearing very respected voices in
international diplomacy and
international law saying that we have
the makings of a case on genocide here
indeed I just listened to an interview
earlier on today by Luis Okuma who was
the first prosecutor of the
international criminal court where he
said use the word genocide as um as a u
a possibility and uh with respect to the
facts on the ground and what you need is
not only evidence of uh the factual
evidence of of uh people being
eliminated in large numbers um and we
already are at 8,800 uh deaths um but
the uh but the intent by the uh by the
rulers of those who are generating the
the conflict and uh as has been
mentioned we have uh repeated statements
by uh senior military political uh
leaders in Israel which uh discuss it as
if the entire population of 2.3 million
Palestinians in Gaza is guilty uh over
what happened on October 7th and that
Gaza needs to be eliminated Gaza needs
to be and to be entirely depopulated
okay let's bring in Donatella to tell us
whether amnesty has seen any evidence
that backs up this claim by
uh the director of the New York office
at the high commission for human rights
where he's saying this is almost it's a
genocide it's a case of genocide
building I mean obviously as the
previous speaker uh has said the um the
threshold and and the legal analysis um
when it comes to making determination on
on genocide is is is lengthy and complex
and uh right now um at Amnesty
International were focused on
investigating what are very serious and
very obvious uh violations of
international humanitarian law uh which
are extremely extremely uh grave um
indiscriminate can you tell us what some
of those violations yeah can you tell us
what some of those violations have been
from either side in
fact um well clearly we've seen um
attacks that violate the uh um this the
proportionality uh
requirement the fact that indiscriminate
attacks have been carried out that
violate the principle of distinctions
these are cornerstones of international
humanitarian law uh We've also seen
clear deliberate attacks on civilians
from the Palestinian armed groups that
went into Israel and deliberately
attacks um civilians um these are all uh
crimes that violate International
humanitarian law that should be
investigated as as war crimes um very uh
very obviously uh we're also seeing uh
on the part of um of Israel the
deliberate restriction on the entry of
humanitarian Aid and goods which are
absolutely necessary for the survival of
the civilian population um fuel being
perhaps the most obvious because no fuel
has been allowed into Gaza fuel is
necessary to produce electricity to keep
hospital equipment functioning life
saving equipment function in in
hospitals as well as um purifying water
at the moment people in Gaza don't have
clean water to drink um you know and
then of course there is everything else
uh food and and medicines in general
these are items that can never ever um
be restricted there should be unfettered
entry of medicines
food um and and all that is necessary
for the civilian population to survive
uh and and I would also add that these
restrictions are not uh a new imposition
on the part of Israel since the 7th of
October but they have been going on for
16 years so again if if if one is
looking at um deliberate action taken to
impose Collective punishment which is
another very uh serious violation of
international humanitarian law uh
Collective punishment on the civilian
population of Gaza um you know that
there is clear evidence of that the the
forcible
displacement uh that we're you know
we've seen uh demanding that the entire
population of North Gaza you know one of
the most densely territories densely
populated territories in the world being
asked at a day notice to move South no
knowing that actually the place where
the civilian population of of Northern
Gaza has been asked to move to is not
safe either because
bombardments um have been increased uh
in the past uh two weeks uh you know
since the population of the north has
been asked to move South um so yeah
people civilians families have no way of
knowing what they could possibly do to
protect themselves to protect their
children um and and so all of these are
are violations of international
humanitarian law and they should all be
investigated a war as war crimes okay n
i mean a lot of the the violations that
have just been listed by uh Donatella
from amnesty are not new we've seen them
before uh nothing moves on the
international front when it comes to the
prosecution of these war crimes at
organizations like the international
criminal court for example I mean how
how do you think that war crimes can be
actually prosecuted what needs to be
done what sort of avenues are there for
accountability
realistically well I mean the only
Avenues of accountability are the legal
accountability at least are are known
and I know that they're being pursued
but more to your question I think that
one encouraging sign that we're seeing
on the streets of capitals around the
world is that people uh young voters
um in uh uh countries around Europe and
in the United States are Marching In
Their hundreds of thousands they are
angry and rightly so they are outraged
at the complete uh disconnect between
the principles they stand for and the
and the uh positions of their government
and I believe that part of the
accountability that we all hope to see
is um uh you know in the medium and long
term the these voters holding their
officials accountable for callousness
for a lack of responsibility and for
complete complicity in in in some cases
with what's going on right now in Gaza
but also more broadly with the m
maintaining uh and entrenching this uh
system of occupation of colonization
dispossession um and ethnic cleansing if
I mean if you take a look at what the
world has allowed to happen for all
these decades in the West Bank they've
allowed settlers to decide where
Palestinians can live where they can uh
uh build their homes and then they
decide who lives who dies who's detained
who's not who's labeled a good guy and
who's labeled a terrorist even if
they're award-winning human rights
Advocates and in Gaza the world has
allowed for far too many years Israel
the occupier to lock up an entire
population uh of more than two million
people half of them children deprive
them of the most essential uh uh uh
requirements of
Life have a say on who can get medical
treatment or not um and they've managed
that they've allowed it to happen and
that is what needs to change and I think
in many ways what we need is a change of
the of that thinking before we can
really hope for accountability at the
legal or political level Michael link
but what about the uh n was just talking
about the complicity uh what about the
complicity of other governments of other
countries like the United States like
the United Kingdom which was referenced
in the letter of the uh the gentleman
who who resigned the director of the New
York office of the high commission for
human rights he said this that the US
and the UK are are being complicit and
what's unfolding in Gaza do you think
that we would see Western leaders ever
being held account for their complicity
or or is that just simply too
difficult not in the near future I'm I'm
afraid to say and uh when we talk about
international law um it is indeed the
moral standard that we that uh Nations
promis to each other and to their
citizens that they will uphold but in
order for international law to be uh to
be effective it needs to be combined
with International resolve and that has
not happened here um Western Nations as
as many have pointed out not over the
last four weeks have been uh explicit
with respect to their denunciations of
Russia's invasion of Ukraine and its
annexation of
Crimea um as violations of international
law yet refus to hold the same standards
that they themselves actually have voted
for in un Security Council resolutions
as well as in UN General Assembly
resolutions with respect to Israel's
many violations of international law
including annexation including uh
settlements which are a war crime
under the under the Rome statute
including its refusal to apply the laws
of occupation under the Fourth Geneva
Convention I may want to remind your
audience but this is not the first time
we've been uh here with with respect to
Israel and Gaza and the allegation of
war crimes after Israel's assaults on
20089 on Gaza after
2014 and after the assaults with respect
to the great March of return in 2018 on
each of those three occasions the uh
Human Rights Council of the United
Nations in Geneva appointed an
independent Commission of inquiry and
each of those three commissions of
inquiry said that there were great
likelihood that Israel had committed war
crimes during each of those three
occasions it also said that it
considered Hamas had likely committed
war crimes during the first two of those
occasions and in each of the three
reports it said we have a desperate lack
of accountability I think in the
Goldstone report of 2009 they use the
term a Justice crisis in the occupied
Palestinian territory uh I'm sad to say
this as a former special rapur and as an
international human rights lawyer that
in the Middle East particularly when it
comes to Palestine international law is
closer to power than it is to Justice
okay just very briefly Michael what is
the point then of of international law
if Israel can choose to ignore it over
and over because it is it is it is our
one common language of of a more moral
compass throughout this world um uh in a
world that's divided by Race by class by
religion um and by geography and
ethnicity it is the one common uh uh
human created um institution that sets
the moral standards by which we judge
each other and okay um I would I would
never say Do not abandon or be cynical
about it I would say push harder all
right Donatella i' just like to get your
take on on a recent report by am
an investigation has found that the
Israeli Army indiscriminately and
therefore unlawfully used white
phosphorus in the south of Lebanon on
the 16th of October can you tell us
about that and and what you're calling
uh on to happen
next um yes I mean we and is it only the
south of Lebanon forgive me because
we've seen the pictures of Gaza as well
where it appears to be the white
phosphorus is being
used yes and we had also published on
that um after those incidents so we were
able to verify use of um U white
phosphorus both in Gaza and in South uh
Lebanon uh through uh a variety of means
we we we saw the Munitions uh being um
with the forces that were located both
in the in the southern border of Israel
close to Gaza and and in the north close
to Lebanon um we saw videos that we were
able to geolocate and and verify showing
um why passor being air bursted over
Gaza over the port and over the zun
neighborhood again densely populated
areas and we were able to investigate
the strikes in um um inia and uh and
andash Shaban Mari in in South Lebanon
um which also injured civilians we've
not received reports of civilians being
um harmed uh in in the using Gaza but we
have in in the case of Lebanon white
phosphorus is not a banned munition it
can be used on the battlefields in areas
where there aren't civilians the manner
in which was used both in Gaza and in
and in Lebanon um are um areas where
there are civilians and therefore it was
using intervention uh okay I would just
add one more point and that perhaps
what's difference this time is that we
have the international criminal court uh
prosecutor who has made a statement um
at the Rafa border uh saying that his
office is looking into both uh into both
um attacks committed by Israel and I'm
glad you bring up Karim Khan because on
that on that final on that final thought
I'll bring in N are you optimistic that
Karim Khan will will uh move quickly and
open an investigations uh on what's
Happening new and will it make a
difference I'm cautiously optimistic
Karim Khan has not so far really done
much to gain the confidence of
Palestinians and many in the
international human rights uh sphere he
has been dubiously uh um absent uh from
from any kind of interaction or
statements regarding several clear uh
violations of of Palestinian rights and
international law now and in the past
his statement while a bit murky uh uh
gives us some hope but I think he needs
to be pushed and he needs to be held to
account and he needs to understand that
the world is watching and that the
integrity and standing of the
institution uh uh to which he answers to
is on the line if he fails and if he uh
reaffirms suspicions that he is not
exactly balanced and that the Justice he
wants to deliver might not be blind uh
then he really jeopardizes that whole
institution of international
accountability I hope that those
skepticisms that skepticism is wrong and
I hope that he can deliver something to
the victims who still have some faith in
that International System all right
we'll have to leave it there thank you
so much for joining us Michael link n
and Donatella Rivera we thank you for
your time and thank you for watching you
can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website
al.com for further discussion go to our
Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory you can
join the conversation on X our handle is
AJ insid story for myself the entire
team here in Doha thanks for watching
bye-bye for
[Music]
now